README.md, before:

# estree-sentry

More precise [estree](https://github.com/estree/estree) type with support for
generic annotations.

![Relationship between estree and estree-sentry](doc/estree-sentry.png)

[estree](https://github.com/estree/estree) and its typescript type definition
[@types/estree](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/estree) are great but many
valid `estree.Program` are nonsensical and consumers do not benefit from the
typescript type system as much as they could. For instance, the key of a
non-computed member expression can be an arbitrary expression but only an
identifier or a private identifier would be sensible. This forces consumers to
backdoor the type system with ugly type assertions such as the
`as Identifier | PrivateIdentifier` below:

```typescript
import { MemberExpression, Identifier, PrivateIdentifier } from "estree";
export const getNonComputedKey = (node: MemberExpression): string | null =>
  node.computed ? null : (node.property as Identifier | PrivateIdentifier).name;
```

`estree-sentry` is almost a subset of `estree` which removes many nonsensical
nodes at the price of more complex type definitions. This makes nodes easier to
consume (but harder to produce).

```typescript
import { MemberExpression } from "estree-sentry";
export const getNonComputedKey = (node: MemberExpression<{}>): string | null =>
  node.computed ? null : node.property.name;
```

`estree-sentry` offers two other features to further leverage the typescript
type system:

- Nodes are recursively parametrized by annotations. This makes it possible to
  enforce constraints on annotations such as code location. For instance, the
  JSON below is a valid `Expression<{foo:123}>`:
  ```json
  {
    "type": "UnaryExpression",
    "operator": "!",
    "prefix": true,
    "argument": {
      "type": "Identifier",
      "name": "x",
      "foo": 123
    },
    "foo": 123
  }
  ```
- Branded types for: variable, label, source, specifier, public key, and private
  key. Definitions [here](lib/brand.d.ts). Turning these data from generic
  string to their own brand, makes types more explicit and prevent some mix-ups.

## Removed nonsensical nodes

- Module declarations cannot appear in script programs.
- Optional expressions cannot appear outside chain expressions.
- Rest elements cannot appear outside object patterns, array patterns, or
  function parameters.
- In module declarations, the source literal and the specifier literals are
  always strings.
- In expression arrows, the body is an expression. And in block arrows, the body
  is a block.
- In update expressions, the argument can only be an identifier or a member
  expression.
- In Assignment expressions with compound operator (eg: `+=`), the left-hand
  side can only be an identifier, a member expression, or a call expression.
- In non-computed member expressions, the key can only be an identifier or a
  private identifier.
- In non-computed object properties, the key can only be an identifier or a
  literal.
- In non-computed class definitions, the key can only be an identifier, a
  private identifier, or a literal.
- In class constructor definitions, the key is always `constructor` and the
  function value does not have an id, cannot be a generator, and cannot be
  asynchronous.
- In object method properties and class method definition, the value can only be
  a function expression without id.
- In object accessor properties and class accessor definitions, the value:
  - con only be function expression (only relevant for object properties)
  - has the correct arity (0 for getters and 1 for setters).
  - does not have in id
  - cannot be a generator
  - cannot be asynchronous

## Additional nodes

- In binary expressions with `in` operator, the left operand can be a private
  identifier.
- In assignment expressions, the left-hand side can be a call expression. Yes,
  this is valid in javascript. I'm not aware of any functions that will make
  this not through a `ReferenceError` though.

Commit message:

feat: brand all infinite types

README.md, after:

# estree-sentry

A more precise [ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree) type with support for
generic annotations.

![Relationship between estree and estree-sentry](doc/estree-sentry.png)

[ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree) and its typescript type definition
[@types/estree](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/estree) are great but many
valid `estree.Program` are nonsensical and consumers do not benefit from the
typescript type system as much as they could. That is due to its contextless
philosophy. For instance, the key of a non-computed member expression can be an
arbitrary expression but only an identifier or a private identifier would be
sensible. This forces consumers to backdoor the type system with ugly type
assertions such as the `as Identifier | PrivateIdentifier` below:

[ESTree](https://github.com/estree/estree) and its TypeScript type definition
[@types/estree](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@types/estree) are great, but many
valid `estree.Program` nodes are nonsensical, which limits the benefits
TypeScript's type system provides to consumers. For instance, the key of a
non-computed member expression can be an arbitrary expression, but only an
identifier or a private identifier would be sensible. This forces consumers to
bypass the type system with type assertions, such as the as
`Identifier | PrivateIdentifier` in the example below:

```typescript
import { MemberExpression, Identifier, PrivateIdentifier } from "estree";
export const getNonComputedKey = (node: MemberExpression): string | null =>
  node.computed ? null : (node.property as Identifier | PrivateIdentifier).name;
```

ESTreeSentry is almost a subset of ESTree that removes many nonsensical nodes at
the price of abandoning its contextless philosophy and adding more type
definitions. This makes nodes easier to consume but harder to produce.

```typescript
import { MemberExpression } from "estree-sentry";
export const getNonComputedKey = (node: MemberExpression<{}>): string | null =>
  node.computed ? null : node.property.name;
```

ESTreeSentry offers two additional features to further leverage the TypeScript
type system:

- Nodes are recursively parameterized by annotations. This makes it possible to
  enforce type constraints on annotations such as code location. For instance,
  the JSON below is a valid `Expression<{foo:123}>`:
  ```json
  {
    "type": "UnaryExpression",
    "operator": "!",
    "prefix": true,
    "argument": {
      "type": "Identifier",
      "name": "x",
      "foo": 123
    },
    "foo": 123
  }
  ```
- Arbitrary strings and numbers are branded to make types more explicit and
  prevent mix-ups. For instance, the name of identifier could be `VariableName`
  or `LabelName` depending on the context.

## Removed nonsensical nodes

- Module declarations cannot appear in script programs.
- Optional expressions cannot appear outside chain expressions.
- Rest elements cannot appear outside object patterns, array patterns, or
  function parameters.
- In module declarations, the source literal and the specifier literals are
  always strings.
- In expression arrows, the body is an expression. And in block arrows, the body
  is a block.
- In update expressions, the argument can only be an identifier or a member
  expression.
- In Assignment expressions with compound operator (eg: `+=`), the left-hand
  side can only be an identifier, a member expression, or a call expression.
- In non-computed member expressions, the key can only be an identifier or a
  private identifier.
- In non-computed object properties, the key can only be an identifier or a
  literal.
- In non-computed class definitions, the key can only be an identifier, a
  private identifier, or a literal.
- In class constructor definitions, the key is always `constructor` and the
  function value does not have an id, cannot be a generator, and cannot be
  asynchronous.
- In object method properties and class method definition, the value can only be
  a function expression without id.
- In object accessor properties and class accessor definitions, the value:
  - con only be function expression (only relevant for object properties)
  - has the correct arity (0 for getters and 1 for setters).
  - does not have in id
  - cannot be a generator
  - cannot be asynchronous

## Additional nodes

- In binary expressions with `in` operator, the left operand can be a private
  identifier.
- In assignment expressions, the left-hand side can be a call expression. Yes,
  this is valid JavaScript. I'm not aware of any functions that will make this
  not through a `ReferenceError` though.
